mon, cephfs: Add auth caps for CephFS fsids (#32581)
ceph/ceph: doc/cephfs/client-auth.rst

prefix length in CIDR notation (e.g., ``10.3.0.0/16``).  If present,
the use of this capability is restricted to clients connecting from
this network.

File system Information Restriction
===================================

If desired, the monitor cluster can present a limited view of the file systems
available. In this case, the monitor cluster will only inform clients about
file systems specified by the administrator. Other file systems will not be
reported and commands affecting them will fail as if the file systems do
not exist.

Consider following example. The Ceph cluster has 2 FSs::

    $ ceph fs ls
    name: cephfs, metadata pool: cephfs_metadata, data pools: [cephfs_data ]
    name: cephfs2, metadata pool: cephfs2_metadata, data pools: [cephfs2_data ]

But we authorize client ``someuser`` for only one FS::

    $ ceph fs authorize cephfs client.someuser / rw
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQAmthpf89M+JhAAiHDYQkMiCq3x+J0n9e8REQ==
    $ cat ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQAmthpf89M+JhAAiHDYQkMiCq3x+J0n9e8REQ==
        caps mds = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Author: The example is definitely correct since I could reproduce the same with `fs authorize` subcommand - 

```
[client.someuser_z]
	key = AQCY5jNfpQImMBAAgu3NyaYSJ/AjkeYC2R06pA==
	caps mds = "allow rw fsname=cephfs2"
	caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs2"
	caps osd = "allow rw tag cephfs data=cephfs2"
```

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Author: I am bit confused with your comment...

Perhaps, what you mean here is that `fs authorize` should assign `r` instead of `rw`?

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Reviewer: > Perhaps, what you mean here is that fs authorize should assign r instead of rw?

That's the behavior I would expect. We don't want typical clients to have write access to the FSMap!

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Author: Yes, I've changed that in last to last push.

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Reviewer: still not right. No matter what perms we specify for access to the file system, the mon caps should **always** be `r`.

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Reviewer 2: The change has been made in the code to enforce MON caps `allow r fsname=<fs-name>`. This is a doc typo.

>         caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

Author: Yes, I made changes in code and elsewhere in doc but somehow this one got missed out. Fixed now - https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/32581/files?file-filters%5B%5D=.cc&file-filters%5B%5D=.h&file-filters%5B%5D=.py&file-filters%5B%5D=.yaml&file-filters%5B%5D=No+extension&file-filters%5B%5D=dotfile#diff-77943c2916082605baaea0916a21c1d5R176.

restricted MDS daemons and file systems may become available by other means,
such as ``ceph health detail``.

MDS communication restriction
=============================

By default, user applications may communicate with any MDS, whether or not
they are allowed to modify data on an associated file system (see
`Path restriction` above). Client's communication can be restricted to MDS
daemons associated with particular file system(s) by adding MDS caps for that
partiuclar file system::

Consider the following example where the Ceph cluster has 2 FSs::

    $ ceph fs ls
    name: cephfs, metadata pool: cephfs_metadata, data pools: [cephfs_data ]
    name: cephfs2, metadata pool: cephfs2_metadata, data pools: [cephfs2_data ]

Client ``someuser`` is authorized only for one FS::

    $ ceph fs authorize cephfs client.someuser / rw
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQBPSARfg8hCJRAAEegIxjlm7VkHuiuntm6wsA==
    $ ceph auth get client.someuser > ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    exported keyring for client.someuser
    $ cat ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQBPSARfg8hCJRAAEegIxjlm7VkHuiuntm6wsA==
        caps mds = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"

>         caps mon = "allow r"

Reviewer: `fs authorize` should also restrict the mon caps too. If it doesn't, please fix it. I think that's the source of confusion for https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/32581/files#r452548130

I don't want to see `ceph auth...` commands in the CephFS documentation unless it's to bridge a necessary gap in the `fs authorize` interface.

Author: > fs authorize should also restrict the mon caps too. If it doesn't, please fix it. I think that's the source of confusion for https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/32581/files#r452548130

Okay, I'll make that change.

Author: > fs authorize should also restrict the mon caps too. If it doesn't, please fix it. I think that's the source of confusion for https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/32581/files#r452548130

I've written the commit, would it better to have a separate PR for this commit?

Author: I've got the same question for the commit I wrote for "goodchar" reivew request - https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/32581#discussion_r450498488.

Reviewer: > I've written the commit, would it better to have a separate PR for this commit?

No, keep it in this one.

Author: Ok.

But we authorize client ``someuser`` for only one FS::

    $ ceph fs authorize cephfs client.someuser / rw
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQAmthpf89M+JhAAiHDYQkMiCq3x+J0n9e8REQ==
    $ cat ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQAmthpf89M+JhAAiHDYQkMiCq3x+J0n9e8REQ==
        caps mds = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"
        caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"
        caps osd = "allow rw tag cephfs data=cephfs"

And the client can only see the FS that it has authorization for::

    $ ceph fs ls -n client.someuser -k ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    name: cephfs, metadata pool: cephfs_metadata, data pools: [cephfs_data ]

Standby MDS daemons will always be displayed. Note that the information about
restricted MDS daemons and file systems may become available by other means,
such as ``ceph health detail``.

MDS communication restriction
=============================

By default, user applications may communicate with any MDS, whether or not
they are allowed to modify data on an associated file system (see
`Path restriction` above). Client's communication can be restricted to MDS
daemons associated with particular file system(s) by adding MDS caps for that

> partiuclar file system::

Author: Fixed; thanks!

Client ``someuser`` is authorized only for one FS::

    $ ceph fs authorize cephfs client.someuser / rw
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQBPSARfg8hCJRAAEegIxjlm7VkHuiuntm6wsA==
    $ ceph auth get client.someuser > ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    exported keyring for client.someuser
    $ cat ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    [client.someuser]
        key = AQBPSARfg8hCJRAAEegIxjlm7VkHuiuntm6wsA==
        caps mds = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"
        caps mon = "allow r"
        caps osd = "allow rw tag cephfs data=cephfs"

Mounting ``cephfs1`` with ``someuser`` works::

    $ sudo ceph-fuse /mnt/cephfs1 -n client.someuser -k ceph.client.someuser.keyring --client-fs=cephfs
    ceph-fuse[96634]: starting ceph client
    ceph-fuse[96634]: starting fuse
    $ mount | grep ceph-fuse
    ceph-fuse on /mnt/cephfs1 type fuse.ceph-fuse (rw,nosuid,nodev,relatime,user_id=0,group_id=0,allow_other)

But mounting ``cephfs2`` does not::

    $ sudo ceph-fuse /mnt/cephfs2 -n client.someuser -k ceph.client.someuser.keyring --client-fs=cephfs2
    ceph-fuse[96599]: starting ceph client
    ceph-fuse[96599]: ceph mount failed with (1) Operation not permitted

> Same is the case with kernel client too, although the error message varies

Author: Yes, that is a bit redundant. Removed.

prefix length in CIDR notation (e.g., ``10.3.0.0/16``).  If present,
the use of this capability is restricted to clients connecting from
this network.

File system Information Restriction
===================================

If desired, the monitor cluster can present a limited view of the file systems
available. In this case, the monitor cluster will only inform clients about
file systems specified by the administrator. Other file systems will not be

> reported and commands affecting them will fail as if the file systems does
> not exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reported and commands affecting them will fail as if the file systems do
not exist.
```

Author: Fixed.

Consider following example. The Ceph cluster has 2 FSs::
    $ ceph fs ls
    name: cephfs, metadata pool: cephfs_metadata, data pools: [cephfs_data ]
    name: cephfs2, metadata pool: cephfs2_metadata, data pools: [cephfs2_data ]

But we authorize client ``someuser`` for only one FS::

>     $ ceph auth add client.someuser mon 'allow rw fsname=cephfs' mds 'allow rw' osd 'allow rw'

Reviewer: Why not use the `fs authorize` interface in the doc?

Author: Because we want to demonstrate the impact on `fs ls` and therefore the client needs MON caps, not MDS caps.

Author: Modified `fs authorize`'s code to assign MON caps too, the doc now never uses `auth add` now.

    exported keyring for client.someuser
    $ cat ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    [client.someuser]
            key = AQA5lgRfC2WvARAA+Wr7mWPwv7eXkvFByGFYJA==
            caps mds = "allow rw"
            caps mon = "allow rw fsname=cephfs"
            caps osd = "allow rw"

And the client can only see the FS that it has authorization for::
    $ ceph fs ls -n client.someuser -k ceph.client.someuser.keyring
    name: cephfs, metadata pool: cephfs_metadata, data pools: [cephfs_data ]

Standby MDS daemons will always be displayed. Note that the information about
restricted MDS daemons and file systems may become available by other means,
such as ``ceph health detail``.

MDS communication restriction
=============================

By default, user applications may communicate with any MDS, whether or not
they are allowed to modify data on an associated file system (see
``Path restriction`` above). Client's communication can be restricted to MDS
daemons associated with particular file system(s) by adding MDS caps for that

> partiuclar file system::

Reviewer: This section somewhat overlaps with the discussion on `fs authorize` at the beginning of this doc. I think you can merge them.

Author: Except for `fs authorize` both look pretty unrelated to each other.

Author: Modified `fs authorize`'s code to assign MON caps too, the doc now never uses `auth add` now.

prefix length in CIDR notation (e.g., ``10.3.0.0/16``).  If present,
the use of this capability is restricted to clients connecting from
this network.

File system Information Restriction

> ===================================

Author: Done. Please take a look and let me know if I need to elaborate - https://github.com/ceph/ceph/pull/32581/files#diff-91e5380318f1e66a0b2ad947685cb4caR90.

If desired, the monitor cluster can present a limited view of the file systems
available. In this case, the monitor cluster will only inform clients about

> filesystems specified by the administrator. Other filesystems will not be

Author: Fixed.

reported and commands affecting them will be ignored as if the filesystems
did not exist.::

 client.0
     key: AQAz7EVWygILFRAAdIcuJ12opU/JKyfFmxhuaw==

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsid=1, allow rw fsid=2

Author: Names are more memorable than IDs in general, so using names would be better IMO.

Would it be OK to allow both, FS names and IDs? It would be more convenient, I guess.

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsid=1, allow rw fsid=2

Reviewer: Both would also work fine (try to parse fscid first) but might needlessly complicate the code. 

Note: using the fs name is consistent with other caps like OSD caps which use pool names. If a pool is deleted and recreated, the old caps still work because they work off the name. So, I would lean towards just using the fsname.

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsid=1, allow rw fsid=2

Author: >  If a pool is deleted and recreated, the old caps still work because they work off the name. So, I would lean towards just using the fsname.

Okay. I'll modify the code to support FS names only.

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsid=1, allow rw fsid=2

Author: Incorporated the change.

prefix length in CIDR notation (e.g., ``10.3.0.0/16``).  If present,
the use of this capability is restricted to clients connecting from
this network.

File system Information Restriction
===================================

If desired, the monitor cluster can present a limited view of the file systems
available. In this case, the monitor cluster will only inform clients about
file systems specified by the administrator. Other file systems will not be
reported and commands affecting them will be ignored as if the file systems
did not exist::

 client.0
     key: AQAz7EVWygILFRAAdIcuJ12opU/JKyfFmxhuaw==

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsname=cephfs1, allow rw fsname=cephfs2

Author: Cool. I was wondering when I started with this PR about how much our docs should elaborate.

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsname=cephfs1, allow rw fsname=cephfs2

Author: I've extended both the sections more in the fashion you mentioned here.

In this case, the monitor cluster will display information about the MDS
daemons associated with file system names "cephfs1" and "cephfs2". Standby
MDS daemons will always be displayed. Note that the information about
restricted MDS daemons and file systems may become available by other means,
such as ``ceph health detail``.

MDS communication restriction
=============================

By default, user applications may communicate with any MDS, whether or not
they are allowed to modify data on an associated filesystem (see
``Path restriction`` above). To restrict communication to MDS daemons
associated with a particular file system(s), use::

 client.0
     key: AQAz7EVWygILFRAAdIcuJ12opU/JKyfFmxhuaw==
     caps: [mds] allow rw fsid=1

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsid=1

Author: Umm, not sure how the unupdated version landed here. I'll update it again.

>      caps: [mon] allow rw fsid=1

Author: Fixed.

prefix length in CIDR notation (e.g., ``10.3.0.0/16``).  If present,
the use of this capability is restricted to clients connecting from
this network.

Filesystem information restriction
==================================

If desired, the monitor cluster can present a limited view of the filesystems
available. In this case, the monitor cluster will only inform clients about
filesystems specified by the administrator. Other filesystems will not be
reported and commands affecting them will be ignored as if the filesystems
did not exist.

::

 client.0
     key: AQAz7EVWygILFRAAdIcuJ12opU/JKyfFmxhuaw==

>      caps: [mon] allow r, allow fsid=1, allow fsid=2

Reviewer: These caps are additive. So: you're basically saying the client can do anything with the monitors allowed by `r`, also `r` for `allow fsid=1`, and `r` again for `allow fsid=2`. So the latter two clauses have no effect.

This should be:

`caps: [mon] allow r fsid=1, allow r fsid=2`

Author: Yep, I am working on it.

Reviewer 2: This commit's message,
```
Add a 'fsid' clause to mon auth caps to restrict a client's view
of the FSMap. Example:

mon 'allow rw; allow fsid 2'

This would restrict the client's view of the FSMap to the MDSMap for
fscid 2. 
```
It's incorrect, right? Should be mon 'allow rw fsid=2'

Author: > beside the document change. Does the code correctly enforce caps: [mon] allow r fsid =1

It works fine AFAIR. I haven't tested it as extensively as the MDS caps.

> It's incorrect, right? Should be mon 'allow rw fsid=2'

Yes, it should be "allow rw fsid=2". And when multiple caps are required it should be "allow rw fsid=1, allow rw fsid=2". The documentation is not updated yet. I intended to update docs after I get an approval regarding current syntax of caps from reviewers.

Author: It works -

```
$ ./bin/ceph --id someuser4 -k ceph.client.someuser4.keyring fs dump -f json-pretty | grep \"id\"
dumped fsmap epoch 9
            "id": 2
$ cat ceph.client.someuser4.keyring
[client.someuser4]
	key = AQB6p31e9wdMMRAAlP58QpKut7ALAW02WVmXYw==
	caps mds = "allow rw fsid=2"
	caps mon = "allow rw fsid=2"
	caps osd = "allow rw tag cephfs data=b"
```

In this case, the monitor cluster will display information about the MDS
daemons associated with file system IDs 1 and 2. Standby MDS daemons will
always be displayed. Note that information about restricted MDS daemons and
filesystems may become available by other means, such as ``ceph health detail``.

MDS communication restriction
=============================

By default, user applications may communicate with any MDS, whether or not
they are allowed to modify data on an associated filesystem (see
``Path restriction`` above). To restrict communication to MDS daemons
associated with a particular filesystem (or filesystems), use:

::

 client.0
     key: AQAz7EVWygILFRAAdIcuJ12opU/JKyfFmxhuaw==

>      caps: [mds] allow rw, allow fsid=1

Reviewer: Same problem here. It shoudl be:

`caps: [mds] allow rw fsid=1`

daemons associated with file system IDs 1 and 2. Standby MDS daemons will
always be displayed. Note that information about restricted MDS daemons and
filesystems may become available by other means, such as ``ceph health detail``.

MDS communication restriction
=============================

By default, user applications may communicate with any MDS, whether or not
they are allowed to modify data on an associated filesystem (see
``Path restriction`` above). To restrict communication to MDS daemons
associated with a particular filesystem (or filesystems), use:

::

 client.0
     key: AQAz7EVWygILFRAAdIcuJ12opU/JKyfFmxhuaw==
     caps: [mds] allow rw, allow fsid=1

>      caps: [mon] allow r, allow fsid=1

Reviewer 2: This should be,
`caps: [mon] allow r fsid=1`
